---
slug: "popler"
title: Synthesizing population time-series data from the USA Long Term Ecological Research Network
package_version: 0.2.0
authors:
  - Aldo Compagnoni
date: 2019-08-13
categories: blog
topicid:
tags:
- Software Peer Review
- R
- peer-reviewed
- popler
- open long-term population data
- US Long Term Ecological Research Network data
- LTER
- online database
- database structure
- PostgreSQL
- API
- R package
- data synthesis
- comparative analysis
---


### Introduction

The availability of large quantities of freely available data is revolutionizing the world of ecological research. Open data maximizes the opportunities to perform comparative analyses and meta-analyses. Such synthesis efforts will increasingly exploit "population data", which we define as time series of population abundance. Such population data plays a central role in testing ecological theory and guiding management decisions. One of the richest sources of open access population data is the [USA Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Network](https://lternet.edu/). However, LTER data presents the drawback common to all ecological time-series: extreme heterogeneity derived from differences in sampling designs. 
We experienced this heterogeneity first hand, upon embarking in our own comparative analysis of population data. Specifically, we noticed that heterogeneities in sampling design made datasets  hard to compare, and therefore hard to search and analyze.

To alleviate these issues, we created `popler`: an online PostgreSQL database (henceforth "popler online database"), and associated R client (henceforth "popler R package"). `popler` accommodates raw population time-series data using the same structure for all datasets. Using raw data, without aggregation, promotes flexibility in data analysis. Moreover, using a common data structure implies that all datasets share the same variables, or the same type of variables. As a result, popler facilitates comparing, manipulating, and retrieving population data. 


#### The popler R package

We strove to make user-friendliness the hallmark of the popler R package. To facilitate use, we created as few functions as possible: popler relies on essentially two functions: `pplr_browse()`, which you can use to see what type of data is available in popler, and `pplr_get_data()`, to download dataset from the popler online database.
`pplr_browse()` allows to select which one of the 305 datasets satisfies user-specified criteria. These criteria will depend on the metadata variables used to describe the dataset stored in popler. These metadata variables, and their contenct, is described by function `pplr_dictionary()`.
Once a user understands the meaning and content of metadata variables, she/he can use `pplr_browse()` to explore which datasets satisfy certain criteria. For example, one could be interested in experimental datasets, that quantify population abundance using cover measurements, and that are at least 20-year long. To see which of these data are available, the user should run:

```r
library(popler)
data_search <- pplr_browse( studytype == 'exp' & datatype == 'cover' & duration_years > 20 )
data_search
```

    ## # A tibble: 4 x 20
    ## title proj_metadata_k~ lterid datatype structured_data studytype duration_years community
    ## * <chr>            <int> <chr>  <chr>    <chr>           <chr>              <int> <chr>    
    ## 1 SGS-~               71 SGS    cover    no              exp                   42 yes      
    ## 2 Post~              140 AND    cover    no              exp                   22 yes      
    ## 3 Vege~              196 BNZ    cover    no              exp                   27 yes      
    ## 4 e133~              235 CDR    cover    no              exp                   26 yes   
    ## # ... with 12 more variables: studystartyr <chr>, studyendyr <chr>, structured_type_1 <chr>,
    ## #   structured_type_2 <chr>, structured_type_3 <chr>, structured_type_4 <chr>, treatment_type_1 <chr>,
    ## #   treatment_type_2 <chr>, treatment_type_3 <chr>, lat_lter <dbl>, lng_lter <dbl>, taxas <list>

This line of code shows that there are only four datasets with these characteristics. If interested we can download these directly:

```r
df_obj <- pplr_get_data( datatype == 'cover' & studytype == 'exp' & duration_years > 20 )
```



#### Managing the popler database and its API

One of the biggest hurdles in creating the popler R package was integrating it with an Application Programming Interface (API) that allows secure access to the popler online database. In principle, the popler R package could access the popler online database directly from R using functionalities of R packages such as RPostgreSQL. However, this poses substantial security threats, and in fact our online database did experience a minor security breach. We therefore welcomed the suggestion to use an API by [Noam Ross](authors/noam-ross/), from rOpenSci. Subsequently, [Scott Chamberlain](authors/scott-chamberlain/), also from rOpenSci, was kind enough to develop the API using the Ruby language, the code for which is currently stored on github.

Querying an SQL database using an API improves security, but poses a few limitations on the features of the popler R package, and imposes the additional challenge of managing the API. The API limits the ways in which the R package can query the popler online database. In particular, our API allows querying popler in two ways: downloading the metadata of all 305 datasets, and downloading entire datasets. Fortunately, these two queries reflect the vast majority of operations that users perform when using the popler R package. In particular, the metadata of all 305 datasets is essentially what is used by the `pplr_browse()` function, and users almost always tend to use `pplr_get_data()` to download entire datasets. Hence, the limitation posed by the API were of little importance when weighed against the benefit provided by increased security. As a side note, using an API provides a minor, yet somewhat enticing perk: a progress bar for the downloads of `pplr_get_data()`.

The API also need be managed in order to avoid crashes which make downloads impossible. The API crashes whenever the online database is stopped and restarted, and whenever the API web service crashes. Stopping and re-starting the database occur, for example, when we want changes to the popler online database configuration to take effect. In those rare cases, the API will crash after stopping the database, and it will need to be restared, taking a few hours before being fully functional again. Moreover, the API will stop working whenever its web service crashes. These crashes occasionally happen, and they require restarting the web server of the API. To monitor whether the web service of our API is running, we use [Uptime Robot](https://uptimerobot.com/), a free application that quantifies the time during which the web server is available to users.

### Conclusion: working with LTER population data

Our work with popler highlighted many opportunities linked to data synthesis using population data from the USA LTER network. Specifically, we found that population time-series data, while containing sometimes daunting heterogeneities, also present conspicuous regularities. By "regularities", we mean that population abundance can be quantified in just a few ways (e.g. using densities, counts, area covered, ect.), that all datasets have a temporal replication of population censuses, a spatial replication structure (which is often times nested), and so on. Ecologists can use these regularities to format most population time-series using the same data model. `popler` suggests that the population data associated with the USA LTER data, and with other long-term population sampling efforts, provide untapped potential to foster synthesis work in population, community, and macro ecology.

#### Acknowledgements

We thank reviewers [Corinna Gries](https://github.com/cgries), and [Benjamin Bond-Lamberty](https://github.com/cgries) for helpful comments that improved the package functionality.