---
slug: rmangal
title: 'rmangal: making ecological networks easily accessible'
date: 2019-10-21
authors:
  - Kevin Cazelles
  - Steve Vissault
categories: blog
topicid: 
tags:
  - Software Peer Review
  - R
  - packages
  - open-data
  - data
  - data-access
  - ecology
  - ecological networks
  - API
  - API client
  - Mangal
  - rmangal
---


In early September, the version 2.0.0 of [rmangal][rmangal] was approved by
rOpenSci, four weeks later it made it to CRAN. Following-up on our experience we
detail below the reasons why we wrote rmangal, why we submitted our package to
rOpenSci and how the peer review improved our package.



### Mangal, a database for ecological networks

Ecological networks are defined as a set of species populations (the nodes of
the network) connected through ecological interactions (the edges). Interactions
are ecological processes in which one species affects another. Although
predation is probably the most known and documented interaction, other less
noticeable associations are just as essential to ecosystem functioning. For
instance, a mammal that unintentionally disperses viable seeds attached to its
fur might help plants to thrive. All of these interactions occur simultaneously,
shaping ecosystems functioning and making them as complex as they are
fascinating.

Recording and properly storing these interactions help ecologists to better
understand ecosystems. That is why they are currently compiling datasets to
explore how species associations vary over environmental gradients and how
species lost might affect ecosystems functioning. This fundamental research
question should help us understanding how ecological networks will respond to
global change. To this end, the Mangal project <https://mangal.io/#/>
standardizes ecological networks and eases their access. Every dataset contains
a collection of networks described in a specific reference (a scientific
publication, a book, etc.). For every network included in the database, Mangal
includes all the species names and several taxonomic identifiers
([gbif](https://www.gbif.org/), [eol](https://eol.org/),
[tsn](https://www.itis.gov/) etc.) as well as all interactions and their types.
Currently, Mangal includes 172 datasets, which represents over 1300 ecological
networks distributed worldwide.



### An R client to make ecological networks easily accessible

In 2016, the first paper describing the project was published[^original_ref]. In
2018, a substantial effort was made in order to improve the data structure and
gather new networks from existing publications. In 2019, the web API was
rewritten, a new website launched and hundreds of new interactions were added.

{{< figure src="/img/blog-images/2019-10-22-rmangal/mangal_explorer.png"
 alt="write an alternative text describing the information contained in the image" width="100%" >}}

Because of all these modifications, the [first version of
rmangal](https://github.com/mangal-wg/rmangal-v1), the R client for the web API,
was obsolete and a new version needed. It is worth explaining here why the R
client is an important component of the Mangal project. Even though Mangal has a
documented [RESTful API](https://mangal.io/doc/api/), this web technology is not
commonly used by ecologists. On the contrary, providing a R client ensures that
the scientific community that documents these interactions in the field can
access them, as easily as possible. The same argument holds true for the [Julia
client](https://mangal.io/doc/jl/) that [Timothée Poisot](https://poisotlab.io/)
wrote because [Julia](https://julialang.org/) is increasingly popular among
theoreticians, that can test ecological theory with such datasets.

We had two main objectives for [rmangal 2.0.0][rmangal]. First, the rmangal
package had to allow users to search for all entries in the database in a very
flexible way. From a technical point this means that we had to write functions
to query all the endpoints of the [new web API][API]. The second goal was to
make the package as user friendly as possible. To do so, we used explicit and
consistent names for functions and arguments, designed a simple workflow, and
documented how to use other field related packages (such as [igraph][igraph]) to
visualize and analyze networks. All of this is explain in the vignette ["get
started with rmangal"](https://ropensci.github.io/rmangal/articles/rmangal.html).



### A successful peer review process

<!-- version to prerelease -->
After some hard work behind the screen and once we deemed our two objectives
achieved, we decided to submit the rmangal package to rOpenSci for peer review. We
did so because we needed feedback, we needed qualified people to critically
assess whether our two main objectives were achieved. Given the strong expertise
of rOpenSci in software review, and given that our package was in-scope,
submitting rmangal to rOpenSci was an obvious choice.

We [had very valuable
feedback](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/332) from [Anna
Willoughby][arw36] and [Thomas Lin Pedersen][thomasp85]. They carefully assessed
our work and pointed out areas where improvement was required. One good example
of how their review made our package better concerns the dependencies. We
originally listed [sf][sf] in `Imports` as we used it to filter networks based
on geographic coordinates. But the reviewers pointed out that this was not an
essential part of the package and that [sf][sf] has several dependencies. This  made us realize that for one extra feature, we were substantially
increasing the number of indirect dependencies. Following the reviewers'
suggestions, we moved [sf][sf] to `Suggests` and added a message to warn users
that to use the [spatial filtering
feature](https://ropensci.github.io/rmangal/articles/rmangal.html#geolocalize-mangal-networks-with-sf)
requires sf to be installed. Similarly, based on another good comment, we
added a function to convert Mangal networks into [tidygraph][tidygraph] objects
and we documented how to plot Mangal networks with [ggraph][ggraph] (and so we
added those packages in `Suggests`). Such improvements were very helpful to
properly connect rmangal to the existing R packages. The plethora of R packages
is one of its major strength, and connecting a package properly to other makes
the entire ecosystem even stronger.

<!-- Future -->
We are now looking for user feedback, not only for rmangal but also for the web
API and the website. We welcome suggestions and contributions, especially for
the documentation. In the future, we envision that rmangal will integrate
functions to format ecological networks for ecologists willing to add their
datasets to Mangal. This will likely be the next major release of rmangal.



### Acknowledgments

We are thankful to all [contributors to
rmangal](https://ropensci.github.io/rmangal/authors.html) and to all ecologists
that have spent countless hours in collecting data. We would like to thank [Anna
Willoughby][arw36] and [Thomas Lin Pedersen][thomasp85] for thorough reviews as
well as [Noam Ross](https://github.com/noamross) for handling the review
process.

[^original_ref]: Poisot, T. et al. mangal - making ecological network analysis simple. Ecography 39, 384–390 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.00976


[arw36]: https://github.com/arw36
[thomasp85]: https://github.com/thomasp85
[igraph]: https://igraph.org/r/
[tidygraph]: https://tidygraph.data-imaginist.com/
[ggraph]:https://ggraph.data-imaginist.com/
[rmangal]: https://ropensci.github.io/rmangal/
[API]: https://mangal.io/doc/api/
[sf]: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/sf/index.html
