---
title: 'useR!2019'
dateStart: '2019-07-09T8:00:00'
dateEnd: '2019-07-12T18:00:00'
description: 'rOpenSci team & community-contributors giving talks'
location: 'Toulouse, FR'
country: '🇫🇷'
attendees:
  - Scott Chamberlain
  - Jenny Bryan
  - Rich FitzJohn
  - Ildi Czeller
  - Thierry Onkelinx
  - Julia Stewart Lowndes
  - Hannah Frick
---

Chat with the rOpenSci team and community members at [useR!2019](http://www.user2019.fr/). Three members of our team, as well as community members will give talks. Scott Chamberlain is Co-founder and Technical Lead of rOpenSci. Jenny Bryan and Rich FitzJohn are part of our Leadership team. Ildi Czeller, who spoke in our recent Community Call on [Security for R](/commcalls/2019-05-07/), will talk about the ropsec package. Thierry Onkelinx will talk about his package, git2rdata, that recently passed software peer review. Hannah Frick will talk about the goodpractice package that rOpenSci uses in software peer review. Julia Stewart Lowndes, who participated in our [Community Call on Code Review in the Lab](/blog/2018/11/29/codereview/) and contributed to the skimr package, is giving a Keynote. Abstracts below. Search the [talk schedule](http://www.user2019.fr/talk_schedule/) for details.


### HTTP Requests For R Users and Package Developers

__Scott Chamberlain__ (Thursday, Programming 1 session)


_Many R users request data from the web in their scripts and packages. This talk introduces a modern suite of packages for managing HTTP requests. The crul package is a modern HTTP request library, including asynchronous requests, automatic handling of pagination, and more. Importantly, crul provides an R6 based object system that makes it easier to program with relative to other tools. The webmockr package mocks HTTP requests, returning user specified mocked responses matching the format of the real thing. The vcr package leverages webmockr to cache HTTP requests and responses. Both webmockr and vcr support many HTTP libraries. Last, httpcode provides information on all HTTP codes, and fauxpas provides proper HTTP error classes for use in most HTTP R libraries. These tools together provide a modern way for R programmers to manage HTTP requests._



### ropsec: a package for easing operations security for the R user

__Ildi Czeller__ (Thursday, Workflow & development session lightning talks)


_Applying security best practices is essential not only for developers or sensitive data storage but also for the everyday R user installing R packages, contributing to open source, working with APIs or remote servers. However, keeping up-to-date with security best practices and applying them meticulously requires significant effort and is difficult without expert knowledge.    The goal of the R package ropsec (github.com/ropenscilabs/ropsec) is to bring some of the best practices closer to all R users and enabling them to add a few more layers of security to their personal workstation and shared work.    In this talk I will focus on signing commits: why you should do it and how ropsec helps you do it the right way with the lowest possible risk of making a mess of your settings. I will also highlight how can you reliably test an R package whose core functionality is changing settings outside your R project.   Work on ropsec started at the 2018 ropensci unconf (unconf18.ropensci.org) and the package continuously improved since then. ropsec leverages gpg (on CRAN) that provides low-level functions for signing commits; the value added comes from the collection of high-level functions, the thorough documentation and the intuitive workflow that help R users to solve end-to-end use cases. Its aim is to mitigate the risk of doing something the user does not intend to do due to the complexity of the low level operations._



### git2rdata: storing dataframes in a plain text format suitable for version control

__Thierry Onkelinx__ (Wednesday, Data handling session)


_Base R has write.table() and read.table() to work with data in plain text files. Factors are stored as their labels, making them indistinguishable from characters and losing information on the levels. The git2rdata packages provides write\_vc() which stores a dataframe as two plain text files: a tab separated file with the data and a metadata file in YAML format. The metadata stores the class of each variable and all other relevant metadata, e.g. the factor levels and their order. read\_vc() reads the raw data using read.table() and restores the variables based on their metadata. Storing the metadata also allows to optimize the file storage, e.g. by storing factor indices rather than factor labels in the data file. This optimization can be turned of in case human readable data is preferred over smaller files. Git stores changes as row wise diffs. Swapping the order of two variables results in changing every single row of the plain text file. write\_vc() avoids this be reordering the variables based on the existing metadata. Sorting the observations along user defined variables result in a stable row order. Metadata can be overridden if needed to accommodate a change in variables. git2rdata is useful to store and retrieve data in a reproducible workflow. Installation instructions, documentation and vignettes are available at https://ropensci.github.io/git2rdata/_



### goodpractice - A Tool for Good Package Development

__Hannah Frick__ (Thursday, Workflow & development session lightning talks)


_Building an R package is a great way of encapsulating code, documentation and data, in a single testable and easily distributable unit. Whether you work by yourself or with others, the goal is always to keep your code easily maintainable and bug-free. R CMD check offers a set of checks on the source code of a package to ensure a quality standard required for packages on CRAN. However, it does not cover other aspects of writing good quality software such as code complexity (1) and does not require testing. The goodpractice package leverages several R packages addressing these aspects and, in one place, calculates code coverage (via covr) and cyclomatic complexity (via cyclocomp), runs linters (via lintr), includes all checks from R CMD check (via rcmdcheck) and gives further advice on good practices for R packages, e.g., to include a URL for a bug tracker. The package currently contains 230 checks to help package developers write high quality packages to a common standard. It is both configurable and extensible, so you can use it with your custom set of checks._

_(1) TJ McCabe (1976) A Complexity Measure. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (SE-2:4)._



### DRY out your workflow with the usethis package

__Jenny Bryan__ (Thursday, Programming 1 session)


_Usethis is one of the packages created in the recent "conscious uncoupling" of the devtools package. Devtools is an established package that facilitates various aspects of package development. Never fear: devtools is alive and well and remains the public face of this functionality, but it has recently been split into a handful of more focused packages, under the hood. Usethis now holds functionality related to package and project setup. I'll explain the "conscious uncoupling" of devtools and describe the current features of usethis specifically. The DRY concept -- don't repeat yourself -- is well accepted as a best practice for code and it's an equally effective way to approach your development workflow. The usethis package offers functions that enact key steps of the package development process in a programmatic and documented way. This is an attractive alternative to doing everything by hand or, more realistically, copying and modifying files from one of your other packages. Usethis helps with initial setup and also with the sequential addition of features, such as specific dependencies (e.g. Rcpp, the pipe, the tidy eval toolkit) or practices (e.g. version control, testing, continuous integration)._


### Describing and solving differential equations with a new domain specific language, odin

__Rich FitzJohn__ (Thursday, Numerical methods session)


_Solving differential equations in R presents a challenge because one must choose between implementations that are either expressive but slow to compute, or cumbersome to write but faster. I present a new package "odin" for removing this tradeoff by creating a domain specific language (DSL) hosted in R that compiles a subset of R to C for efficiently expressing and solving differential equations (JavaScript and R are compilation targets under current development). By treating the set of differential equations as a directed acyclic graph, the DSL is declarative rather than imperative. "odin" leverages the well established "deSolve" package to interface with a number of well understood solvers. I present applications of "odin" both in a research context for implementing epidemiological models with 10's of thousands of equations and in teaching contexts where we are using the introspection built into the DSL to automatically generate shiny interfaces._



### R for better science in less time

__Julia Stewart Lowndes__ (Wednesday, Keynote)


_There is huge potential for R to accelerate scientific research, since it not only provides powerful analytical tools that increase reproducibility but also creates a new frontier for communication and publishing when combined with the open web. However, a fundamental shift is needed in scientific culture so that we value and prioritize data science, collaboration, and open practices, and provide training and support for our emerging scientific leaders. I will discuss my work to help catalyze this shift in environmental science through the Ocean Health Index project. Over the past six years, our team has dramatically improved how we work by building an analytical workflow with R that emphasizes communication and training, which has enabled over 20 groups around the world to build from our science and code for ocean management. R has been so transformative for our science, and we shared our path to better science in less time (Lowndes et al. 2017) to encourage others in the scientific community to embrace data science and do the same. Building from this, as a Mozilla Fellow I recently launched Openscapes to engage and empower scientists and help ignite this change more broadly._
