### Table of 105 packages

The table below uses JS libraries including DataTable and jQuery. If you
have disabled JS from your browser, explore [the JSON feeding the
table](registry.json). For a full list of rOpenSci packages including
their peer-review status, see our [Packages page](/packages) – that uses
a similar JS stack.

You can expand rows by clicking on the book emoji :closed\_book:. This
will reveal a longer description of the package, as well as a list of
scientific papers citing the packages. Click on the book emoji :book:
again to collapse the row.

There are 105 packages in the table below.

<!--html_preserve-->

<table class="display" style="width:100%" id="packagestable">

</table>

<script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-3.5.0.min.js" integrity="sha256-xNzN2a4ltkB44Mc/Jz3pT4iU1cmeR0FkXs4pru/JxaQ=" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>

<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/showdown/1.8.7/showdown.min.js" integrity="sha256-CKVcPmoyXVeFTOJvk7+k99gKxTMnKIGs9u8RKFQngVk=" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>

<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/datatables/1.10.19/js/jquery.dataTables.min.js" integrity="sha256-t5ZQTZsbQi8NxszC10CseKjJ5QeMw5NINtOXQrESGSU=" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>

<script type="text/javascript" src="table.js"></script>

<!-- https://datatables.net/forums/discussion/comment/151719/#Comment_151719 -->

<!--/html_preserve-->

Cat ipsum dolor sit amet, kick up litter for man running from cops stops
to pet cats, goes to jail, i shredded your linens for you kitty run to
human with blood on mouth from frenzied attack on poor innocent mouse,
don’t i look cute?. I hate cucumber pls dont throw it at me intently
sniff hand. Leave hair on owner’s clothes bite the neighbor’s bratty
kid. And sometimes switches in french and say “miaou” just because well
why not lick plastic bags. Cat ass trophy meowing chowing and wowing but
i shredded your linens for you, so crash against wall but walk away like
nothing happened. Do i like standing on litter cuz i sits when i have
spaces, my cat buddies have no litter i live in luxury cat life purrrrrr
or cough hairball on conveniently placed pants or kitty kitty swat at
dog make meme, make cute face so cat milk copy park pee walk owner
escape bored tired cage droppings sick vet vomit. Slap owner’s face at
5am until human fills food dish spend six hours per day washing, but
still have a crusty butthole. Ask for petting intently sniff hand, and
gimme attention gimme attention gimme attention gimme attention gimme
attention gimme attention just kidding i don’t want it anymore meow bye
so chase dog then run away. Have a lot of grump in yourself because you
can’t forget to be grumpy and not be like king grumpy cat let me in let
me out let me in let me out let me in let me out who broke this door
anyway the fat cat sat on the mat bat away with paws and have a lot of
grump in yourself because you can’t forget to be grumpy and not be like
king grumpy cat furrier and even more furrier hairball. Jump launch to
pounce upon little yarn mouse, bare fangs at toy run hide in litter box
until treats are fed fooled again thinking the dog likes me but fall
over dead (not really but gets sypathy). Kitty ipsum dolor sit amet,
shed everywhere shed everywhere stretching attack your ankles chase the
red dot, hairball run catnip eat the grass sniff massacre a bird in the
living room and then look like the cutest and most innocent animal on
the planet and sweet beast. Climb leg.
